Exploratory Note 21

Modigliani and Miller -- Trade-Off Theory

**INTRODUCTION**

Precise funding sources aside, does capital structure---a firm's mix of
equity and debt---actually matter? If so, is there an optimal capital
structure which will maximize shareholder value? Questions like these
have interested both academicians and practitioners for quite a long
time: Modigliani and Miller (1958), for instance, set the groundwork for
a simple but powerful debt tradeoff theory (which was a major
contributing factor to Modigliani's 1985 and Miller's 1990 Nobel Prize
awards) while Myers and Majluf (1984) present an alternative, asymmetric
information-based theory. After a brief introduction to capital
structure and the cost of capital, this first exploratory note of the
evening presents some of the ideas of Modigliani and Miller.

**CAPITAL STRUCTURE (AND COST)**

To understand Modigliani and Miller, we need to think about a few basic
questions regarding the capital structure of a firm. First, what exactly
is capital structure?

***The Cost of Capital - Equity***

Now, debt and equity differ in terms of cost. Which is cheaper? Why?

The cost of equity is notoriously difficult to calculate; however, the
Gordon Growth Model (GGM) and the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)
provide reasonable models. Starting with the GGM:

![](media/image1.png){width="1.8541666666666667in" height="0.875in"}

What do the different variables stand for in the GGM?

What is the primary intuition behind the GGM?

Any major issues with the GGM?

In a prior exploratory note, we discussed the CAPM---though, admittedly,
in a different context (we were using it as a baseline model to test the
ability of VC fund managers to generate alpha). It can also be utilized
to estimate the cost of equity:

![](media/image2.wmf)

What do the different variables stand for in the CAPM?

What is the primary intuition behind the CAPM?

Any major issues with the CAPM?

***The Cost of Capital - Debt***

Clearly, the cost of equity is tricky, but things are a lot simpler when
it comes to the cost of debt: either the after-tax yield to maturity
(YTM) on existing debt is computed or estimates of current rates are
utilized.

What is the YTM of a debt instrument?

Why after-tax? What role does taxation play in the conversation?

***The Weighted Average Cost of Capital***

This brings us to the weighted average cost of capital (WACC):

![](media/image3.gif){width="5.364583333333333in"
height="0.3645833333333333in"}

What are the different variables?

**MODIGLIANI AND MILLER -- TRADE-OFF THEORY**

If there is an optimal capital structure, it would be logical that it
should minimize the cost of capital. In 1958, Franco Modigliani and
Merton Miller set the groundwork for a powerful debt tradeoff theory
which does just this. Consider the figure on the following page:

\[HANDBOOK OF FINANCING GROWTH 4.1\]

The intuition behind the model is simple: there is value to the tax
shelter offered by every dollar of debt, but debt also increases the
likelihood of financial distress and/or bankruptcy. The optimal capital
structure, therefore, is to be found when the marginal cost of adding
another dollar of debt (due to increased likelihood of financial
distress and/or bankruptcy) is greater than the marginal benefit of
adding another dollar of debt (per the tax shield). Make sense?

So, if a firm is perceived to be underleveraged, what should be done?
Why?

**CONCLUSIONS**

To a significant extent, this exploratory note is insufficient in its
coverage of Modigliani and Miller; however, due to time constraints and
asymmetry in student backgrounds, the mathematical foundations of the
theorem need to be omitted. Even so, the general takeaway for
entrepreneurs should be obvious: (the right amount of) debt is a good
thing.
