Exploratory Note 30

Corporate Governance -- A Primer

**INTRODUCTION**

Corporate governance broadly consists of the system of rules and
processes by which a company is directed and controlled. Though the ends
of corporate governance can be somewhat varied, the central concern is
the establishment of a foundation for ensuring that managers do not
shirk, abscond with, or misallocate the funds supplied by
investors---thereby ensuring, as best as possible, a return for the
investors. This penultimate exploratory note of the semester provides a
primer on the subject.

**THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS**

Corporate governance starts with the Board of Directors. A partial list
of duties is below:

-   Monitoring company performance

-   Setting corporate strategy

-   Overseeing/approving the capital and key operating budgets

-   Setting/approving compensation for top executives

-   Overseeing risk management

-   Evaluating top executive performance

-   Planning top executive succession

Though all of these functions are important, this evening, our concern
revolves around the role that the Board of Directors plays in aligning
the interests of managers and shareholders.

**THE AGENCY DILEMMA REVISITED**

Human nature arguably being as it is, managerial misbehavior is to be
expected in the absence of appropriate mechanisms of control. As
discussed earlier in the semester, the agency dilemma provides us with a
theoretical rationale as to why this is the case. To review, what is the
difference between a principal and an agent, in an economic setting?

Are principals and agents always privy to the exact same information?
Why does this matter?

Are principals and agents always going to have the same goals? Consider
both moral hazard and conflicts of interest, among other things.

**POTENTIAL EXAMPLES OF MANAGERIAL ABUSE AND/OR MISUSE**

Of course, the misalignment of managerial and investor interests can
manifest itself in a number of ways, but let us consider a few:
executive compensation and perquisites, transfer pricing, empire
building, and entrenchment.

***Executive Compensation and Perquisites***

Do managers likely prefer more compensation and perquisites as opposed
to less?

Are high managerial compensation and perquisite levels in the best
interests of investors?

Of course, not all forms of compensation are the same---a matter to be
addressed in more depth a little later on this evening.

***Transfer Pricing***

What is transfer pricing?

Consider a managerial buyout (MBO). What is an MBO? Does management
potentially have an informational advantage when it comes to the true
value of a firm's assets?

After the fact, if investors feel cheated out of a deal that they agreed
to and executed, do they have opportunity for recourse in the legal
system?

For smaller firms, pricing squabbles frequently erupt over questionable
lease, rental, and other financing arrangements. What might these look
like?

***Empire Building***

What is empire building in a business sense?

Alleged instances of empire building often involve acquisitive growth.
Are the returns associated with acquisitive growth typically impressive
or underwhelming?

***Managerial Entrenchment***

What is managerial entrenchment? What mechanisms exist to assist
managers in entrenching themselves? Is managerial entrenchment likely
good or bad for investors? What does the historical record suggest?

Entrenched managers may have a tendency to diversify holdings at the
firm-level. Why?

Are firm-level diversification efforts likely to generate solid returns?
Why or why not?

**CORPORATE GOVERNANCE MECHANISMS FOR ALIGNING INTERESTS**

Three mechanisms offer potential solutions for alignment: contracts,
incentives, and control.

***Contracts***

Naturally, the simplest way to align interests is to use legal contracts
where the use of funds is precisely scripted as is the distribution of
cash flows between managers and investors. But, can *ex ante* contracts
adequately cover all possible states of nature?

Would it make sense to use contracts which give the investors final say
whenever information changes? Consider both large and small companies as
the answers may be different.

This leads us to the legal issue of managerial discretion. Though courts
will protect investors from blatant managerial abuse, they are reluctant
to otherwise intervene in company-level affairs. Accordingly, managers
are generally afforded significant discretion in their decision-making
and actions. Is this reasonable?

That said, do managers still have a duty to the stockholders? Is it
legally exclusive?

***Incentives***

Both theory and practice suggest that positive incentives can be an
effective way to align the interests of management with those of
investors. Stock options are frequently used for this purpose. How do
they work in a compensation setting?

Ultimately, who grants options to management? Interestingly enough, when
a poorly motivated board does the negotiating, these arrangements can
come up short. For instance the evidence seems to suggest the options
grants come before good news and are delayed until after bad news. Why?
Does this defeat the purpose of the incentive?

Stock-based incentives are also used in smaller firms for similar
purposes. Are such incentives likely to be as effective? Why or why not?

***Control***

For companies both large and small, controlling blocks of stock hold
higher values than do minority blocks after a transaction. Why does
control matter?

Though large shareholders can potentially abuse small shareholders, if
we treat their interests monolithically for a moment, does the existence
of a large shareholder likely advance the interests of small
shareholders? Consider the issue of the monitoring of the firm.

If all else fails, a credible threat of elimination by takeover can help
to align managerial interests with those of investors. How do takeovers
work in the public arena? Is this the case when it comes to private
firms?

**HIGHLY LEVERAGED STRUCTURES**

Arguably, a highly leveraged capital structure offers a superior
corporate form that eliminates many agency issues. Why?

Are their significant downsides to this type of corporate form? Do they
potentially outweigh the benefits?

**MANAGERIAL REPUTATION**

Might reputation constrain the actions of managers? Why?

Under what circumstances might reputation be insufficiently strong to
constrain managerial opportunism?

**STARTUPS**

How important is corporate governance in a startup setting? Do the same
concerns, remedies, etc. apply?

Can advisory boards assist in establishing and maintaining good
governance processes in a startup?

As a quick digression, in what other areas can and do advisory boards
assist startups?

**CONCLUSIONS**

Given that factors external to the firm make business quite risky to
begin with, does the additional issue of paid managers shirking,
absconding, and/or misallocating funds make investment completely
unattractive? What prompts investors to hand over money?
