Exploratory Note 26

NPV Revisited and an Introduction to the Logic of Real Options Analysis

**INTRODUCTION**

As we discussed last week, Net Present Value (NPV) is undoubtedly a
powerful tool; however, it is dependent upon the rather dubious
assumption of certainty. As reality, of course, is rarely quite so
predictable, there is an opening for an alternative: real options
analysis (ROA) or real options valuation (ROV). Whereas NPV assumes that
once a project is accepted it will be pursued until completed no matter
what happens, ROA recognizes that many projects are inherently
flexible---that they present entrepreneurs and/or managers with multiple
decision nodes. Depending on the project and the uncertainty of its cash
flows, there may, for instance, be value to waiting, expanding,
contracting, or even abandoning a project entirely. Interestingly
enough, these real options have value which is quantifiable upfront, at
least to an extent, using options pricing models.

**NET PRESENT VALUE -- A REVIEW**

As you may recall from our last discussion, the dominant approach, from
a textbook standpoint, to capital budgeting is net present value (NPV).
The formula, of course, is as follows:

![](media/image1.wmf)

What are the inputs again?

What is the logic behind the NPV approach to capital budgeting? What is
the decision rule?

For those who are not as familiar with the time value of money, why are
the future cash flows discounted? In practice, what would the discount
rate typically be for a project of average risk?

What about for a project with above-average risk? For a project with
below-average risk?

What are the strengths of NPV? Does it meet all of the necessary
criteria of a sound capital budgeting decision making tool? These
criteria include:

-   The time value of money is taken into consideration

-   All cash flows are taken into consideration

-   Cash-flows are risk-adjusted

-   Projects can be objectively ranked

-   Indicates added value to the firm

Under conditions of certainty, we cannot do better than NPV; however,
the practical world is anything but certain---and this ends up mattering
a great deal.

**NPV -- AN INSTANCE WHERE IT COMES UP SHORT**

Consider, for instance, an investment opportunity which requires
\$100,000,000 to build a commercial real estate complex which is
expected to be sold a year later for \$110,000,000---a 10% profit.[^1]
For the sake of simplicity, assume that the project will be funded 100%
by debt at the current yield of 10.3%. Back of the envelope, the NPV for
this project is roughly negative \$300,000. According to the decision
rule, should the project be pursued?

If someone approached the firm and offered to buy the opportunity for
\$100,000, should the firm accept the offer?

What if, however, the yield dropped in the near future from 10.3% to
9.8%? In such a case, the NPV of the project would be roughly \$200,000.
According to the decision rule, should the project be considered under
such circumstances? But, if the project has already been sold, is this
an option any longer?

Now, what if the debt yield was originally 9.99%? The NPV of the project
would be marginally positive (about \$1,000). Should the project be
pursued per the NPV decision rule?

Per Stephen Ross, this brings us to a simple, but important point:
"*every project competes with itself delayed in time* \[emphasis my
own\]. This is the essence of the problem with applying the NPV rule. In
a capital budgeting context with a budget constraint, undertaking a
project means taking on that feasible combination of projects that
maximizes the NPV. Clearly with interest rate uncertainty, we trade off
the value of taking on the project today against the lost opportunity
cost of foregoing the option to undertake the project at some later date
when interest rates are more favorable. This same reasoning can also
resolve the problem of rejecting the project when it should be accepted,
i.e., of selling the rights to the project too low. Selling the project
to the dealmaker is not only selling today\'s project, it is also the
sale of all the potential future projects."

**OPTION LOGIC -- VALUE IN UNCERTAINTY AND THE FLEXIBILITY TO RESPOND**

Net present value is supposed to provide us with unbiased conclusions
when it comes to investment decisions; however, in the absence of
certainty, it completely fails to address the value inherent to
optionality and the flexibility to exploit it. Consider the following
options: deferral, abandonment, expansion, contraction, extension, and
switching.

***Basic Option Definitions***

What is an option in a financial sense?

What is the difference between a call option and a put option?

***The Option to Defer***

With the example from above in mind, are all investments of the variety
where you either invest right now or forever lose the opportunity? Why
might the option to wait be valuable?

Consider, for instance, the decision as to whether or not to acquire the
mineral rights (or development rights) to a particular piece of ground.
Does such an opportunity necessarily have to be a do-or-die investment?
Some may be, but if not, what is the alternative?

Further, consider changes in the cost of debt (and equity). Could a
seemingly worthless project become valuable over time due to the
stochastic nature of these variables?

***The Option to Abandon***

NPV calculations are surprisingly linear: if a project is pursued, it
will be seen through to the end. But, is this always wise? Consider, for
instance, a multi-stage investment. If conditions should shift and the
project no longer makes sense, should subsequent stages be funded?

Does the option to abandon mitigate upside or downside potential for a
given project?

***The Option to Expand***

Some projects are definitive in both scope and contract---yet others
are, or can be made, more flexible. Some projects, for instance, permit
you to dip a toe in, test the waters, and consider whether or not to
fully take the dive. Is this attractive? Why?

Does NPV take this into consideration?

Other projects may require heavy upfront capital expenditures to get
into the game. If excess capacity is built, this gives the holder the
ability to rapidly expand to take advantage of unexpected demand. Of
course, this costs more upfront, but is it worthwhile? If demand
skyrockets and a firm cannot meet it, what might be the consequences?

Does NPV take this into consideration?

Does NPV potentially bias decision makers against building excess
capacity?

***The Option to Contract (Scale Back)***

Some projects allow for an aggressive (and ambitious) early effort, but
can be curtailed if things do not work out as planned. Is this
attractive? Why?

Does NPV take this into consideration?

***The Option to Extend***

Some projects are of a finite life, but others can be extended. Consider
development rights once again. To avoid making an irreversible decision,
a deferral option might be purchased at some price which has a time to
expiration of five years. Could it make sense to contractually establish
an extension option which allows for the time to expiration to be
extended by five years?

Does NPV take this into consideration?

I have also seen extension option language used to describe investments
made which open up future opportunities in ancillary areas. For
instance, consider a company that unprofitably builds a large following
and then pivots (or extends its offerings)---does building an audience
have value?

Does NPV take this into consideration?

***The Option to Switch***

Some projects can be turned on an off like a switch. Consider a gold
mine: if gold is expensive, it makes sense to pull it out of the ground;
if it is cheap, it should stay where it is. The same goes with
productive capacity of all types. Is there potentially value in being
able to switch a project on and off (as opposed to either not having
exposure or being fully committed)?

Does NPV take any of this into consideration?

**CONCLUSIONS**

If a project is materially uncertain, real options matter. The question
remains: can we quantify the value of real options? This is the focus of
the second and final note of the evening.

[^1]: This example is borrowed from the assigned Ross article.
