Exploratory Note 16

Understanding Term Sheets

**INTRODUCTION**

A VC typically signals its intention to invest by offering a term sheet
to the potential portfolio company which is either accepted, sent back
with requested changes, or rejected outright. Once accepted, though
additional negotiation is to be expected from both sides as the VC dives
into its due diligence, the term sheet serves as an anchor for future
negotiations between the parties until the investment is closed. This
first note of the evening is concerned with helping you to navigate a
term sheet---with a heavy emphasis on some of the items which can become
problematic.

**VC TERM SHEETS**

VC contracts are designed to protect the investor from expropriation,
which can occur either through negligence (low effort by managers) or
malice (stealing or self-dealing). Thus, a term sheet describes the
basic structure of a transaction and provides a set of protections
against expropriation.

***The Basics***

The first page or two of a term sheet can generally tell us quite a bit
about a proposed offer. Consider:

![](media/image1.emf){width="4.468150699912511in"
height="4.645833333333333in"}

![](media/image2.emf){width="4.6671227034120735in"
height="2.7604166666666665in"}

A few items to consider:

What kind of security is being offered in the term sheet? What is the
original purchase price (OPP)?

In this case, the investment implies ownership of 33.33 percent of the
company on a *fully diluted basis* (which assumes that all preferred
stock is converted and that all options are exercised). All of the
investment, \$5,000,000.00, is provided at one time per this term sheet.
A common alternative structure uses *tranches*. What is a tranche?

The terms pre-money and post-money valuation are frequently used in
early-stage firms. Pre-money valuation equals the price per share times
the pre-transaction (fully diluted) share count while post-money
valuation equals the price per share times the fully diluted share
count. Ostensibly, these terms are analogues to market capitalization.
What is market capitalization?

Keep in mind that because both pre- and post-money calculations do not
distinguish between preferred and common stock, the results do not
necessarily reflect anything about the true market value of the
company's common stock.

***The Charter***

The Charter, also known as the Certificate of Incorporation, is a public
document filed with the state in which the firm is incorporated. In the
majority of VC transactions, this state is Delaware. Why?

Among other things, the Charter establishes the rights, preferences,
privileges, and restrictions of each class and series of the company's
stock.

![](media/image3.emf){width="5.0230260279965in"
height="5.427083333333333in"}

![](media/image4.emf){width="5.703817804024497in"
height="6.354166666666667in"}

A few items to consider:

The possibility of dividends is mentioned in the Charter. In public
companies, preferred stock is usually issued with the promise of
consistent cash dividends. Is this the case when it comes to preferred
stock issued to VC? If not, why?

Sometimes, accrued cash dividends are to be paid to preferred stock
holders. What are accrued dividends and why might accruals be utilized?

Finally, preferred stock might receive stock dividends which add to
their total holdings. Such stock is called payment-in-kind ("PIK"). Why
would PIK be utilized?

When a company is sold, merged, or shut down---a deemed liquidation
event---the proceeds are generally distributed to bondholders, preferred
stockholders, and common stockholders, in that order. A liquidation
preference tells an investor where he or she stands in the capital
structure hierarchy. When there have been multiple rounds of financing,
it is common for the latest-round investors to get their money back
first. Why?

In some cases, investors insist on liquidation preferences in excess of
their original investment---with 2-3x being fairly common. Why?

Early institutional rounds often demand disproportionate board
representation. Why?

Additionally, anti-dilution provisions are standard. Why? Are they
foolproof?

Redemption rights give conditions under which investors can demand that
the company redeem (pay back) their initial investment. In practice,
these rights are difficult to enforce and rarely exercised. If
exercised, is the firm in question likely doing well or poorly?

***Investor Rights Agreement***

An example investor rights agreement:

![](media/image5.emf){width="5.10249343832021in"
height="5.885416666666667in"}

**\[SPACE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK\]**

![](media/image6.emf){width="5.989583333333333in"
height="6.114583333333333in"}

**\[SPACE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK\]**

![](media/image7.emf){width="5.71875in" height="6.875in"}

A few items:

Stock purchased in private transactions is restricted. This means that
the stock cannot be sold in a public offering. To lose this restriction,
a transaction must be registered (requires filing legal documents and
disclosing data about the firm to the SEC). Registration is
expensive---as such, firms typically want to avoid it unless absolutely
necessary. Demand registration rights allow investors to force the
company to register a transaction for their shares. S-3 and piggyback
registration rights are weaker, but give additional mechanisms for
investors to get their shares registered---as long as another
transaction is being prepared.

Major investors are normally granted access to company facilities and
personnel during normal business hours with sufficient notice.
Additionally, it is common for financials to be presented at least
annually, if not more frequently.

The right to maintain proportional ownership is important for some
investors---especially when matters of control are at stake. If
additional rounds of financing are expected, this is an important
matter.

Non-competition and non-solicitation requirements for entrepreneurs are
critical. Why? How enforceable are they?

Employee stock options generally vest over time. Why is this so
important?

***Other Items***

![](media/image8.emf){width="5.6875in" height="4.8125in"}

![](media/image9.emf){width="5.90625in" height="5.239583333333333in"}

What is a right of first refusal? Why is this necessary?

What is the right of co-sale (or tag-along)? Why is this necessary?

Usually, it is the case that founders' stock can only be forcefully
bought back if the founder is dismissed for cause within a certain
period of time after investment. Why are these provisions in place?

**CONCLUSIONS**

As a preliminary agreement used to anchor the key contractual provisions
for a VC investment, the term sheet does not guarantee that a deal will
go through; however, it does represent a serious step towards
consummation.
