Exploratory Note 15

VC Returns

**INTRODUCTION**

Do venture capital firms make money for their investors? Though, in the
short run, entrepreneurs may not care, in the long run, it is an
important question to consider. If the answer is, in fact, a definitive
no, then venture capital could prove to be little more than a temporary
phenomenon.

***INDIVIDUAL INVESTMENT MULTIPLES***

Gross value multiples (GVMs) are the exit multiple of the initial
investment. Since VC firms are on a fixed time table, an IPO or
acquisition (of some kind) is going to be required. Consider below:

***First Round GVMs***

![](media/image1.emf){width="3.8499639107611547in"
height="4.053754374453193in"}

How do you interpret a multiple of 1x or less?

How do IPOs and acquisitions differ vis-Ã -vis first round investment
multiples?

In results that I do not show, the entirety of first round investments
yield nearly 75% failing to return the initial capital invested and
fewer than 8% returning more than 10x.

***Second Round GVMs***

How about for second round investments? See below:

![](media/image2.emf){width="4.333215223097113in"
height="4.302083333333333in"}

How do the numbers look for both IPOs and acquisitions?

Similar to the first round results, when all investments are considered
(data not shown), roughly 75% do not return the initial capital invested
and about 9% return more than 10x.

**RISK-ADJUSTED VC RETURNS**

So far, our thinking in this note has been risk- and time-neutral, but
proper thinking demands consideration of both risk and time---and, thus,
a pricing model.

***The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)***

The CAPM is the dominant theoretical pricing model in finance. It rests
on a number of assumptions beyond the scope of this course, but is built
on the insight that the appropriate risk premium on an asset will be
determined by its contribution to the risk of investors' overall
portfolios.

In its most common form:

![E(R\_i) = R\_f + \\beta\_{i}(E(R\_m) -
R\_f)\\,](media/image3.png){width="2.7395833333333335in"
height="0.22916666666666666in"}

Define the specific variables:

This relationship is portrayed graphically as the security market line
(SML):

![C:\\Users\\Profit\\AppData\\Local\\Microsoft\\Windows\\Temporary
Internet
Files\\Content.Word\\bod30700\_0902.jpg](media/image4.jpeg){width="3.4166666666666665in"
height="3.625in"}

The SML provides a benchmark for the evaluation of investment
performance. Given the risk of an investment, as measured by its beta,
the SML provides the required rate of return necessary to compensate
investors for risk as well as the time value of money.

So, how do historical VC returns stack up against the CAPM in regression
form? Consider:

![](media/image5.emf){width="1.93334208223972in"
height="6.330417760279965in"}

What does alpha measure? Is a positive alpha good or bad?

What is the estimated market beta for VC investments? Does this suggest
above- or below-average risk for VC funds?

***Pastor-Stambaugh Model (PSM)***

Theoretically, the CAPM is a truly beautiful model thanks in large part
to its simplicity; however, it has some empirical issues that have
brought about a wide number of alternatives. Chief among them is the
Pastor-Stambaugh model which adds three variables of interest: size,
value, and liquidity. Consider below:

![](media/image6.emf){width="2.0104166666666665in"
height="5.9782075678040245in"}

Before delving into the data, why include firm size as a variable? Value
(and what does this mean)? And liquidity?

What variables appear to be statistically significant?

Do venture capital firms appear to generate alpha?

What is the joint-hypothesis problem? How does it relate to the above
question? Can we say for sure that venture capital firms do or do not
outperform the market?

**NOTABLE VENTURE CAPITAL FIRMS**

Able to beat the market or not, venture capital currently occupies an
important place in the start-up community. There is a lot of debate
about which firms are truly top-tier; however, the below list introduces
quite a few of the best performers.

![](media/image7.emf){width="3.5in" height="4.86361220472441in"}

For more detailed accounts of these firms (which made investments in
Facebook, OpenTable, AOL, Amazon.com, Compaq, Electronic Arts, Google,
Intuit, Juniper Networks, Netscape, Sun, Symantec, Apple, Cisco, Yahoo,
YouTube, TiVo, Netflix, Twitter, and Hotmail), I encourage you to take a
look at the fifth chapter of the assigned text.

**CONCLUSIONS**

Next week, we will continue our discussion of venture capital with
sessions on term sheets, preferred stock, and corporate VC activities.
