Exploratory Note 29

Startup Valuation Techniques:

The Berkus and Risk Factor Summation Methods

**INTRODUCTION**

Comparables and discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis can be used for
companies at all different stages of development; however, in the
absence of certainty, it is important for you to understand that the
outputs of such models are going to be (at least) somewhat
unreliable---and this is especially true when it comes to early-stage
firms. This note expands on our discussion of valuation by presenting
two alternative approaches that are designed especially for very
early-stage firms: the Berkus and Risk Factor Summation Methods. These
models do not provide us with greater accuracy or precision in practice;
however, as they are widely utilized in the early-stage community,
especially by non-institutional investors, they are worthy of
consideration.

**THE BERKUS METHOD**

The so-called Berkus Method was designed by David Berkus about twenty
years ago and has received limited academic attention since the early
2000s (it was first addressed in *Winning Angels*---a practical review
of early-stage angel performance written by a couple of Harvard
professors). Instead of looking forwards a number of years and
attempting to project financial performance---through relative or
absolute efforts---and working backwards to an appropriate valuation,
the Berkus Method looks at five factors and attributes up to half a
million dollars of value for each: soundness of the idea, prototype
existence, quality of the management team, strategic relationships, and
existing sales. Each is considered in the below sub-sections.

***Soundness of the Idea***

The first matter of concern for the Berkus Method is the conceptual
soundness of the idea. This has nothing to do with current performance,
only potential. What factors would likely justify a half million dollar
partial valuation?

Is a niche market necessarily underserving of a full half million dollar
partial valuation?

***Prototype Existence***

Is there a prototype in existence? If so, is this a good thing? Why?

If not, does this necessarily warrant a less than half million dollar
partial valuation? Why?

***Quality of Management Team***

It is interesting that traditional valuation metrics do not directly
address managerial quality; although, it can be indirectly addressed
through the subjective adjustment of inputs or selection of multiples.
How?

The Berkus Method addresses this issue directly. First, why is
management critical? What constitutes good management?

Does a poor management team necessarily warrant a less than half million
dollar partial valuation? Why?

***Strategic Relationships***

The Berkus Method puts a premium on strategic relationships. Why are
they important?

***Existing Sales***

Finally, existing sales are considered. Why are existing sales a good
thing?

The existence of sales helps to minimize production risk. What is
production risk and why is it a concern for early-stage firms?

***Putting All Five Together***

The Berkus Method culminates in the aggregation of the partial
valuations derived from the five areas considered above. If a firm
scores excellent in the first four categories, but does not currently
have sales, then the Berkus Method would support a valuation of,
perhaps, no more than two million dollars.

What do you think of this approach? Is it reasonable? Is it perfect? If
it is less than perfect, what are its flaws?

**RISK FACTOR SUMMATION METHOD**

The Risk Factor Summation Method is similar to the Berkus Method, but
starts with a median valuation and proceeds to make set adjustments
based off of an analysis of twelve risk factors. Each risk factor is
assessed as follows:

+2 Very positive for growing the company and executing a successful exit

+1 Positive

0 Neutral

-1 Negative

-2 Very negative for growing the company and executing a successful exit

Every point is worth either plus or minus \$250,000 when it comes to the
final valuation (which starts at an appropriate geographic median).

The risk factors:

Management

Stage of the Business

Legislation and Political Risk

Manufacturing Risk

Sales and Marketing Risk

Funding and Capital Raising Risk

Competition Risk

Technology Risk

Litigation Risk

International Risk

Reputation Risk

Potential for a Lucrative Exit

**OTHER NON-QUANTIFIABLE VALUATION FACTORS**

The lists above are by no means exhaustive when it comes to matters of
importance to early-stage valuation. Consider, for instance, the
following:

Board Seats -- if an institutional investor wants two board seats and
the founder is only willing to give up one, what will likely be demanded
by the institutional investor in exchange for such a concession (if it
does not kill the deal entirely)?

Founder Vesting - might the vesting period requirements of a founder
lead to different demanded valuations by the capitalists? Why?

Anti-Dilution Requirements -- anti-dilution is a negotiable matter. Why
might it lead to different valuations?

**CONCLUSIONS**

What can we take away from all of this? If nothing else, recognize that
valuation is an inherently imprecise science---so imprecise, in fact,
that it might be more appropriate to refer to it as an art form with
scientific characteristics.
