Exploratory Note 22

Myers and Majluf -- Peking Order Theory

**INTRODUCTION**

In a very influential article published several decades ago in the
*Journal of Financial Economics*, Stewart Myers and Nicholas Majluf
(1984) present an alternative, asymmetric information-based theory of
capital structure. The particulars are briefly set out in this second
note of the evening---followed by a discussion of the importance of
signaling in the marketplace.

**MYERS AND MAJLUF -- PECKING ORDER THEORY**

According to Myers and Majluf, firms prioritize their sources of
capital---identified as internal financing (retained earnings), debt,
and new equity---according to their costs: cheaper sources will be
utilized first, followed by those which are more expensive. The authors
also posit a direct relationship between informational asymmetries and
capital cost. This is the core of pecking order theory.

Internal financing (retained earnings) is considered by Myers and Majluf
to be the cheapest source of financing. Why is it inexpensive?

Debt is next. Why? Consider informational asymmetries.

Finally, equity. Why is it so expensive? Again, consider asymmetries in
information.

**THE IMPORTANCE OF SIGNALING IN THE MARKETPLACE**

Pecking order is attractive in its logic and simplicity; however, it has
not been found to be all that representative of reality in most
empirical studies, though there are exceptions. Nevertheless,
informational asymmetries are a big issue in economics in general and
finance in particular as they can lead to a breakdown in markets and,
therefore, inefficient allocations. This leads us to the matter of
signaling, which may explain some of the deviation between the
predictions of pecking order theory vis-Ã -vis reality.

What is signaling in the context of economic and financial actions?

In large publicly-traded firms, how does the market tend to view new
stock offerings? Is the signal likely to be viewed negatively or
positively? Why? Does this seem to line up with pecking order theory?

For emerging firms that are going public, how does the market tend to
view such offerings? Is the signal likely to be viewed negatively or
positively if the founders maintain a lot of stock? Why? What about if
the founders only retain a small proportion of the stock? Does this seem
to line up with pecking order theory?

For established firms, is the issue of debt likely to be taken as a
positive or a negative signal? Why? Does this seem to line up with
pecking order theory?

But what if the money is borrowed from insiders? For instance, during
the last financial crisis, VCs lent quite a bit of money to their
portfolio companies. Why? How do you think this signal is likely to be
interpreted by the market? Does this seem to line up with pecking order
theory?

**CONCLUSIONS**

Stakeholders are constantly interpreting signals---real or
perceived---that are derived from firm-level actions---as such,
signaling is necessarily an issue of first-order importance for
entrepreneurs as it is critical to the management of stakeholder
expectations.
