Exploratory Note 18

Alternative Sources for Early-Stage Firms

**INTRODUCTION**

Though angels, venture capitalists, and banks are dominant players in
the early-stage market for finance, a number of alternative
sources---some of them quite new---exist which are open to a fairly wide
variety of businesses. This first exploratory note of the evening
discusses four of these alternatives: crowdfunding, visa-based options,
grants, and owner financing.

**CROWDFUNDING**

Crowdfunding is a relative newcomer to the world of finance; however,
its influence is growing at a very rapid pace. Below, we consider
rewards-based crowdfunding, equity crowdfunding, and debt crowdfunding.

***Rewards-Based Crowdfunding***

Rewards-based crowdfunding tends to follow two primary models:
Keep-It-All (KIA) and All-Or-Nothing (AON).

What is Keep-It-All? Indiegogo offers KIA as a platform.

What is All-Or-Nothing? Kickstarter is a good example of an AON
platform.

From a risk perspective, in the KIA model, the risk is largely shifted
to the crowd (even if the goal is not achieved, their money is provided
to the entrepreneur), while in the AON model, the risk is largely
shifted to the entrepreneur (if the goal is not achieved, then no money
is raised). Accordingly, KIA projects tend to be smaller (and scalable)
while AON projects tend to be larger. AON campaigns appear to be more
successful vis-Ã -vis KIA campaigns, respectively.

***Equity Crowdfunding***

Since the signing of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act into
law in 2012, equity crowdfunding remained in regulatory limbo as the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) decided on the final rules for
adoption. Historically, only accredited investors (for the most part)
could invest in private security issues. Since the adoption of
Regulation A+ several months ago, however, the rules have changed for
small raises in the future.

What are some of the downsides to raising equity from a larger number of
people?

Do these downsides offset the upsides?

***Debt Crowdfunding***

Other crowdfunding sources (often referred to as "peer to peer", "P2P",
or "marketplace lenders") offer a variety of debt options. Lending Club
and the Prosper Marketplace are good examples of these types of
platforms.

How does the crowd make money with this model?

**VISA-BASED OPTIONS**

Countries all over the western world have had investment-based visa
programs for decades; although, they have really taken off in the last
several years---due in no small part to the interest of wealthy Chinese.
Since the early 1990s, the United States has offered green cards,
through the EB-5 visa program, to those who are willing to invest
between \$500,000 and \$1,000,000 in a US business which is either able
to create or save ten jobs.

What types of projects are appropriate?

The lower threshold investment of \$500,000 (this will be changing) is
available to those who invest in regional center projects or targeted
employment areas (TEAs). What are these?

What types of returns are typical for EB-5 investors?

**GRANTS**

Grants can come from a wide variety of sources ranging from governments
(especially at the federal and state level) to private trusts and
foundations. Grants can be very time consuming to obtain---especially if
operated by a government agency; however, they can make a very big
difference for small and larger companies alike.

**OWNER (SELLER) FINANCING**

Bridging into the next exploratory note which looks at later-stage and
largely acquisitive strategies, owner (seller) financing can be very
effective.

From the perspective of the buyer, what is likely to make for a good
owner-financed deal?

With acquisitions, of what does the buyer need to be particularly aware?
Are the risks the same for a stock purchase as for an asset purchase?

What are seller concerns in such deals?

**CONCLUSIONS**

This exploratory note largely concludes our exploration of major sources
of finance for entrepreneurial firms.
