Exploratory Note 14

VC Value Added and the Monitoring of Portfolio Firms

**INTRODUCTION**

Venture capital firms are usually expected to do more than simply invest
money. Though capital is critical, so are a host of other tangible and
intangible value adds.

**VC VALUE ADDED AND THE MONITORING OF PORTFOLIO FIRMS**

VC value adds come from a variety of functions performed by them (many
of which double as monitoring mechanisms) including: board
representation, corporate governance, human resources, matchmaking, and
strategy.

***Board Representation***

Holding one or more seats on the board of directors is a key mechanism
for VC monitoring. Why is the board of directors so important? What do
VC have to add?

On what types of issues does the board have say?

A major point of contention that can and does arise is whether or not
the founder of startup should be replaced with a professional manager
once the firm achieves a certain level of success. Peter Drucker argues,
"there is entrepreneurial work and there is managerial work, and the two
are not the same." What do you think?

Further, there is an argument to be made that a shift from "passionate
commitment" to "dispassionate objectivity" is needed once a firm becomes
established. What do you think?

Historically, have founder-CEOs performed worse than professional-CEOs?

***Corporate Governance***

Corporate governance rules define the power-sharing relationship between
shareholders and managers. Though governance is a controversial area
(which we will explore during the last two sessions of the course), the
best time to set good rules is while a company is still small and before
it goes public. Interestingly enough, the historical record supports the
following associations when it comes to VC-backed firms:

-   They are less likely to engage in aggressive accounting prior to an
    IPO;

-   They are more likely to have independent boards and board
    subcommittees;

-   They are more likely to separate the roles of CEO and Chairman.

***Human Resources***

VCs spend a large amount of time working on human resource issues at
their portfolio companies. Can the reputation of a VC assist a firm in
attracting top talent? If so, why? Is VC money a notable signal?

Scholarship suggests that VC-backed firms are quicker to hire senior
executives (such as a VP of Marketing) and adopt stock option plans.
What are the potential benefits?

How important are human resources issues to startup firms?

***Matchmaking***

VCs often use their contacts and reputation to make introductions that
can lead to new partnerships, customers, and suppliers. Are VCs prone to
pushing relationships between their own portfolio companies?

***Strategy***

When it comes to strategy, VCs play a material role. Consider, for
instance, the matter of exit. What does a VC have to add relative to the
entrepreneur or most (if not all) participants in the organization?

Some VCs are generalists while others are specialists. What is the
difference? How will the advice of both differ?

**CONCLUSION**

High-growth firms are difficult to manage due to a combination of rapid
growth, feelings of infallibility, internal turmoil, and inevitable
resource needs. VCs are not able to eliminate these problems; however,
their resources and experience do much to strengthen a firm's ability to
thrive within such an environment.
