Exploratory Note 25

Capital Budgeting Decision Making Tools

**INTRODUCTION**

Entrepreneurs and financial managers have an array of tools available to
assist in making optimal capital budgeting decisions. One of these
tools, net present value (NPV), is theoretically superior to the others,
but practitioners frequently use alternatives like internal rate of
return (IRR) and payback period. These three tools---with a heavy
emphasis on both their strengths and weaknesses---are the subject of
this second exploratory note of the evening.

**NET PRESENT VALUE**

The dominant approach, from a textbook standpoint, to capital budgeting
is net present value (NPV). The formula is as follows:

![](media/image1.wmf)

What are the inputs?

What is the logic behind the NPV approach to capital budgeting? What is
the decision rule?

For those who are not as familiar with the time value of money, why are
the future cash flows discounted? In practice, what would the discount
rate typically be for a project of average risk?

What about for a project with above-average risk? For a project with
below-average risk?

What are the strengths of NPV? Does it meet all of the necessary
criteria of a sound capital budgeting decision making tool? These
criteria include:

-   The time value of money is taken into consideration

-   All cash flows are taken into consideration

-   Cash-flows are risk-adjusted

-   Projects can be objectively ranked

-   Indicates added value to the firm

Though NPV is theoretically sound, does it have any weaknesses when it
comes to practice?

***A Basic Corporate Investment Example -- Software Development***

A firm is thinking about developing a new piece of software which will
facilitate portfolio rebalancing for RIAs, FOs/MFOs, and other wealth
managers. Development of the software will cost \$1,000,000 (assume that
this cost occurs at time 0). If the software is expected to generate
\$300,000 worth of free cash flow for the firm in each of the next four
years before becoming obsolete, would this be a good project for the
firm to pursue if it requires a 13% return? Calculate NPV.

***A More Complex Corporate Investment -- An Acquisition***

A firm is contemplating acquiring another company in a related but
different business. The firm can be acquired for \$7,500,000. The cash
flow expected to be generated by the firm in the first year after the
acquisition is \$1,000,000. In the second year, it is expected that this
amount will double. In the third year, cash flow growth is expected to
drop to 4%. This growth rate is expected to continue for the foreseeable
future. Should the firm make the acquisition if its cost of capital
(required return in this setting) is 11%? Calculate NPV.

**ALTERNATIVE EVALUATION TECHNIQUES -- IRR AND PAYBACK**

Though there are quite a few different tools traditionally utilized in
capital budgeting settings, two significant alternatives to NPV exist:
internal rate of return (IRR) and payback period.

***Internal Rate of Return (IRR)***

Though NPV is dominant from a textbook point of view, the dominant
approach from an applied standpoint is the internal rate of return
(IRR):

![](media/image2.wmf)

What are the variables?

What is the logic behind the IRR approach to capital budgeting? What is
the decision rule?

![](media/image3.gif){width="4.452631233595801in"
height="2.4479166666666665in"}

What are the strengths of IRR? Does it meet all five criteria laid out
previously?

Strengths aside, IRR has some significant weaknesses. For instance, it
can yield multiple answers due to Descartes' Rule of Signs---thereby
making it difficult or impossible to interpret.

![](media/image4.gif){width="4.073685476815398in"
height="2.2395833333333335in"}

Further, IRR can mislead us when it comes to mutually exclusive projects
that have either different timeframes or different initial investment
requirements:

![](media/image5.gif){width="3.0104166666666665in"
height="2.0288779527559053in"}

Additionally, IRR assumes reinvestment of positive cash flows at the IRR
as opposed to NPV which assumes reinvestment at the WACC. Is this
reasonable or is it likely to exaggerate?

***Payback***

Another common approach, in practice, is payback (sometimes referred to
as the payback period). What is the logic behind it? What is the
decision rule?

What are the strengths of payback? Does it meet all five criteria laid
out previously?

What are the weaknesses of payback?

**SOME CONCLUDING THOUGHTS**

Capital budgeting is exceptionally important: if done well, a company
will likely prosper; if done poorly, a company will likely fail (or at
least underperform). This being said, the tools are all inherently
imperfect. Why?

Does this mean that we should not attempt to properly analyze projects?
Almost certainly not, but we need to be very careful with the way that
we interpret the outputs.
